# Agenda

- TRS implementation - show successful cardinality tests
  - What should be the accumulator function for sets? like for sum/cardinality, our accumulator is just addition, but maybe I should make a separate AST func for set accumulation?
- Remade the quantifier-to-for-loop rewrite transitions (show notebook)
- For the quantifier generator ~> for loop transitions, should we use disjunctive normal form or conjunctive normal form?
  - Current idea is to use DNF and maybe combine generators that are exactly the same
  - Handling variable renaming may be a challenge tho...
  - Ask for some examples of proper translations/cases for nested and/or-clauses
- I think this section is the most difficult, just need to work through all the quantifier rewrite rules, then we can start producing LLVM IR and begin a cycle of additional rewrite rules and IR testing
- 2 weeks left until presentation
  - what should be my focus? Not sure if jupyter integration will be ready, but basic demos from files -> IR should exist at a minimum
  - For next time, Ill start making a slideshow?
    - What topics do we need to cover?
      - Background
        - Abstract data types for ease of use (closeness to discrete math, easier proofs, etc.) and optimization (responsibility of the compiler to make decisions rather than baked into data type)
        - What other people have done, why ours is different
        - Event B/spec techniques/ideas and principles behind modelling/spec langs - look at setL (for what not to do - executable set theory that failed)
      - Motivating Examples
        - Visitor Info System
        - Warehouse
        - Game of Life
      - Method
        - Rewrite rules/TRS, including strategy
        - Compiler pipeline
      - Demo - pretty print ast as algorithmic code - see p0
      - Discussion
        - What goes here? alternatives? existing solutions?
        - mem consumption/runtime
        - how to make it usable/keep it theoretical investigation? limits? guarantees for mem consumption and runtime? what would be possible? size of generated code, theoretical result of the input? judge by # of operators/nested of operators, relationship of generated code "size" to the "input"
      - Future work
        - Jupyter interaction
        - Tackling tree data structures
        - how to make it a useful tool? use with existing tools, change B code generator? potential applications, even if we dont actually want to do it

# Compiler Progress

- Open issues:
  - accumulator function for sets - maybe make a new AST node?
  - side effects from choosing generators - right now we just attach hidden fields into current AST nodes, maybe it would be better to make a new AST node for these (see hasattr hack in rewrite_collection.py)
  - Dummy variable renaming - right now we use assignment, but there should be strict checks on variable names to ensure correct generated code
  - Singleton membership code generation - need special rewrite rule for free x in $x = e$ - could just exclude the rule for now and construct the full for loop

## Legend

x - complete
\> - WIP/incomplete
< - complete, but no tests

## Status

- [x] Frontend
  - [x] Scanner
  - [x] AST
  - [x] Parser
  - [x] Bound/Free variable checks
  - [x] Scoping
  - [x] Type check pass
- [ ] Middle-end
  - [x] TRS design
  - [x] TRS infrastructure
  - [>] Add rules
  - [x] Break up rules/strategies into phases
  - [ ] Test TRS
- [ ] Backend
  - [ ] LLVM IR target
  - [ ] Pipeline trial (from plaintext to executable)
- [ ] Jupyter
  - [ ] Jupyter server for executing language - storing variables, using across multiple cells, etc
- Compiler addons progress
  - [ ] Better syntax error messages
  - [ ] Reverse compiler - AST-to-plaintext (formatter?)
  - [ ] Syntax highlighting
    - [ ] Design
    - [ ] VSCode
    - [ ] Jupyter
  - [ ] Target multiple architectures
- Other
  - [ ] Benchmarks against other languages
    - [ ] Implement examples in Python
    - [ ] Implement examples in Haskell
    - [ ] Implement examples in Rust
    - [ ] Implement examples in C
  - [ ] Test against AI-generated code
    - [ ] Need a fair prompt for each example

# Notes

- DONE: change the spec triple into ands (replace commas with lands, change P_a s to big wedge)
- DONE: make algorithmic pretty printer for AST
