# Agenda

- Reworked rule system - failing
- see open issues below
- 2 weeks left until presentation
  - what should be my focus? Not sure if jupyter integration will be ready, but basic demos from files -> IR should exist at a minimum
  - For next time, Ill start making a slideshow?
    - What topics do we need to cover?
      - Background
        - Abstract data types for ease of use (closeness to discrete math, easier proofs, etc.) and optimization (responsibility of the compiler to make decisions rather than baked into data type)
        - What other people have done, why ours is different
        - Event B/spec techniques/ideas and principles behind modelling/spec langs - look at setL (for what not to do - executable set theory that failed)
      - Motivating Examples
        - Visitor Info System
        - Warehouse
        - Game of Life
      - Method
        - Rewrite rules/TRS, including strategy
        - Compiler pipeline
      - Demo - pretty print ast as algorithmic code - see p0
      - Discussion
        - What goes here? alternatives? existing solutions?
        - mem consumption/runtime
        - how to make it usable/keep it theoretical investigation? limits? guarantees for mem consumption and runtime? what would be possible? size of generated code, theoretical result of the input? judge by # of operators/nested of operators, relationship of generated code "size" to the "input"
      - Future work
        - Jupyter interaction
        - Tackling tree data structures
        - how to make it a useful tool? use with existing tools, change B code generator? potential applications, even if we dont actually want to do it

# SYNT Presentation Plan

## Slides

1. Title
2. Motivation
  1. Abstract Data Types - Featuring Collection types
    1. What are they
    2. Why do we want to use them? (easier to work with, prove, closer to theoretical discrete mathematics and thus understandable to computer science students)
  2. Abstract Data Types - Usage
    1. Use in languages (Python, Haskell, SetL)
  4. Motivating Example 1: Visitor Information System
    1. Review specification
    2. Explore different typical implementations
  5. Motivating Example 2: Warehouse
    1. Review specification
    2. Explore different typical implementations
    3. Leans into database-adjacent territory?
  6. Motivating Example 3: Conway's Game of Life
    1. Review specification
    2. Explore different typical implementations
  7. Implementation of ADTs + ADT operations in those languages
  8. Why hasn't this work been done before? Brief limitations
    1. No side effects, expression based, short circuiting may cause problems, etc.
    2. Haskell discourages comprehensions in style guide https://wiki.haskell.org/Programming_guidelines#List_Comprehensions. Functional langs tend to be very sequence-oriented
3. Goals - What are we trying to accomplish?
    1. intersection between python usability and C performance
4. Term Rewriting System to Achieve these Goals
  1. 1 slide per phase, include relation phase last, smooth transition
5. Current state of this language's compiler
    1. Big-O analysis of the resulting system (time and memory)
      1. Compare against other programs (if our compiler works)
    2. Applications in the overall Lean Programming program (where does this fit in - see dr. sekerinskis proposal again)
    3. Give a timeline/progress bar, future plans, etc.
6. Thank you

# Compiler Progress

- Open issues:
  - two counter-examples on Teams
    - I need to delay equals substitution until after if-statements
    - Leave duplicate generators ungrouped and unoptimized for now
- Tasks:
  - composition - explicitly write exists - can get around this with imaging?
  - Powerpoint slides
    - big-o running time
    - teams message
  - TODO accumulator function for sets - maybe make a new AST node? Can just use rust inserts
- Postponed issues:
  - Singleton membership code generation - need special rewrite rule for free x in $x = e$ - could just exclude the rule for now and construct the full for loop
  - LLVM/MLIR target
  - translating bags to relations - how to count them up without pre-evaluating them? Are compile time rewrites sufficient?
  - dealing with subsets and powersets
    - look at prev. student examples
    - leave out powerset, subset generators for SYNT
    - can try postponing powerset to latest possible moment
      - or what if powerset arg is another more complex expression
    - check what alloy allows
  - leave out bags

## Legend

x - complete
\> - WIP/incomplete
< - complete, but no tests

## Status

- [x] Frontend
  - [x] Scanner
  - [x] AST
  - [x] Parser
  - [x] Bound/Free variable checks
  - [x] Scoping
  - [x] Type check pass
- [ ] Middle-end
  - [x] TRS design
  - [x] TRS infrastructure
  - [>] Add rules
  - [x] Break up rules/strategies into phases
  - [>] Test TRS
- [ ] Backend
  - [>] LLVM IR target - deferred, rust instead
  - [>] Pipeline trial (from plaintext to executable)
- [ ] Jupyter
  - [ ] Jupyter server for executing language - storing variables, using across multiple cells, etc
- Compiler addons progress
  - [ ] Better syntax error messages
  - [ ] Reverse compiler - AST-to-plaintext (formatter?)
  - [ ] Syntax highlighting
    - [ ] Design
    - [ ] VSCode
    - [ ] Jupyter
  - [ ] Target multiple architectures
- Other
  - [ ] Benchmarks against other languages
    - [ ] Implement examples in Python
    - [ ] Implement examples in Haskell
    - [ ] Implement examples in Rust
    - [ ] Implement examples in C
  - [ ] Test against AI-generated code
    - [ ] Need a fair prompt for each example

# Notes

- complexity measurements - big o notation - size of input vs size of output
- runtime guarantees, intermediate memory
- do all the relation rules (except composition might be tricky)

# Things to add to spec
The usual definitions are
x ∈ ∪ S  ≡ ∃ s ∈ S . x ∈ s  ≡  ∃ s . s ∈ S ∧ x ∈ s
x ∈ ∩ S  ≡  ∀ s ∈ S . x ∈ s. ≡  ∀ s . s ∈ S ⇒ x ∈ s
x ∈ {y . P | E}  ≡   ∃ y . P ∧ x = E
therefore
x ∈ ∪ s . P | E  ≡  ∃ s . P ∧ x ∈ E    the ∃ has to be made explicit
x ∈ ∩ s . P | E  ≡  ∀ s . P ⇒ x ∈ E     the ∀ has to be made explicit

# Presentation Notes:
To ask:
- Should I remove the McMaster logo from the footer of every slide?
- In slide 4, the meaning of | in the sum expression is as a separator between predicate and expression, similar to comprehension. I had a question about it in my previous message for slide 4 (just to make sure we are on the same page). I have changed the examples to better suit bags as a relation. Out of curiosity, is there a relational equivalent syntactic sugar for bags, or are we forced to use composition? I would expect that R[B] where B is a bag would collect the result of  (y | x |-> y in R and x in B) for the number of times x appears in B (thus returning a bag). Also, is there an easier way to "exchange" maplets between relations. In the first example, the extra comprehension is mostly to transform (m |-> n_m) |-> n_p into m |-> (n_m |-> n_p).
- Slide 5: I intended for Type Refinements to capture whether relations could be organized by partiality, injectivity, surjectivity, etc. For example, UML has many-to-one and one-to-one constructs, Event-B directly uses the aforementioned terms, but most HashMap implementations do not care whether they are partial/total, etc. I haven't heard of the word subsumption before, but would that better describe the column?
- Slide 10: In the table of definitions, what determines whether we bind a variable through the comprehension vs. through an ∃? For example, image only binds y, but inverse binds x and y, even though both are part of the generator.
- My TODOs for tomorrow:
  - Add ongoing example to term rewriting slides
  - Record a rehearsal and send to you

TODO:

Slide 16:
On all these slides, try to put the postcondition on the bottom left or bottom right and the translation of a running example, say the visitor information system, to the right, so the audience doesn't get lost in the abstract rules. That way, you can leave out Slide 11, as it will be on the right of the last rewrite rule. Slides 12 and 13 can then go after the rewrite rules, so people can see what the rewrite rules are capable of. That may make a better flow.

Can you record a rehearsal, watch it yourself, and send me a link? Normally, we do rehearsals in group meetings, we'll have to do it now remotely, sadly.